<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook XML V4.1-Based Variant V1.0//EN" "dtd/kdex.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY kappname "&noatun;">
  <!ENTITY % English "INCLUDE" > <!-- change language only here -->
  <!ENTITY % addindex "IGNORE">
  
  
]>

<book lang="&language;">
<bookinfo>
<title>The &noatun; Handbook</title>

<authorgroup>
<author>
<firstname>Charles</firstname>
<surname>Samuels</surname>
<affiliation>
<address><email>charles@kde.org</email></address>
</affiliation>
</author>
<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->
</authorgroup>

<copyright>
<year>2001</year>
<holder>Charles Samuels</holder>
</copyright>

<legalnotice>&FDLNotice;</legalnotice>

<date>2001-02-13</date>
<releaseinfo>0.10.03</releaseinfo>

<abstract>
<para>&noatun; is a fully-featured plugin-based media player for &kde;.</para>
</abstract>

<keywordset>
<keyword>KDE</keyword>
<keyword>Noatun</keyword>
<keyword>kdemultimedia</keyword>
<keyword>mp3</keyword>
<keyword>music</keyword>
<keyword>media</keyword>
</keywordset>
</bookinfo>

<chapter id="introduction">
<title>Introduction</title>

<para>&noatun; is a fully-featured plugin-based media player for KDE.</para>

<sect1 id="features">
<title>Features</title>

<para>By default, &noatun; supports the MP3 format, MPEG-1 video and Wav.  Other
formats can be easily installed as plugins.  As of this writing, there are
plugins for OpenDivx.  OggVorbis is also supported if the libraries were
availible during the compilation of mpeglib.  See the <ulink
url="http://mpeglib.sourceforge.net">mpeglib</ulink> for other plugins.
</para>

</sect1>
</chapter>

<chapter id="using-noatun">
<title>Using &noatun;</title>

<para>&noatun;, by default, starts with the Excellent user interface plugin.
This plugin was chosen since it bears the most similarity to other &kde;
applications.</para>

<para>&noatun; is unique in that no two installations are the same, and there is
no standard interface, although there is a default one.</para>

</chapter>

<chapter id="using-noatun-plugins">
<title>Using &noatun; Plugins</title>

<para>You can select different plugins by going to the
<guimenuitem>Settings</guimenuitem> menu, and selecting <guimenuitem>Configure
Noatun</guimenuitem>.  Move to the <guilabel>Plugins</guilabel> by selecting the
appropriate list item.  Then drag, or move the items with the arrow buttons.
Enabled plugins are on the upper list, while disabled plugins are on the bottom
list.</para>

<sect1 id="milk-chocolate">
<title>Milk Chocolate</title>

<para>Milk Chocolate is a small, simple User Interface. The buttons behave
mostly like a CD-player, and the <guiicon>eject</guiicon> button opens the
playlist.  The <guiicon>sheet with a cross</guiicon> button removes the current
playlist item, but does not delete the file from disk, and the
<guiicon>arrow</guiicon> button sets the looping mode.  A menu is available by
&RMB; clicking anywhere in the window.</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="young-hickory">

<title>Young Hickory</title>

<para>Young hickory is a plugin for the &kde; System Tray, the area near the
clock, by default.</para>

<para>&RMB; clicking on the icon will show a small menu, and &LMB; clicking
will toggle the visibility of your &noatun; user-interface windows.  Note that
playlists, for example, are not considered user-interfaces.</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="id3-reader">
<title>ID3 Reader</title>

<para>The ID3 reader will read the ID3 tag information from MP3 files, and set
the song titles in the format you've requested.  The <guilabel>ID3 tag
loader</guilabel> page in the Noatun preferences window will allow you to modify
the format.  Enter the format string in the first textbox, and a preview will
appear on the second. </para>

<para>You can also modify the ID3 tags of the files from the
<guimenuitem>Plugins</guimenuitem> menu, <guimenuitem>ID3
Editor</guimenuitem></para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="html-exporter">
<title><acronym>HTML</acronym> Playlist Export</title>

<para>This plugin will place your playlist in a nice <acronym>HTML</acronym>
table.  Its preferences page will allow you to set colors, background image, and
enable the Hover mode, for changing colors when the cursor is over a
link.</para>

<para>After setting options, the <guimenu>Player</guimenu> menu's
<guimenuitem>Playlist Export</guimenuitem> will open a file dialog for you to
select where to save the output. </para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="kjofol-skin">
<title><application>KJofol</application> Skins</title>

<para>The &noatun; <application>KJofol</application> skin loader is a partial
reimplementation of a  &Windows; program under the same name.</para> 

<para>&noatun;'s implementation has a few limitations, unfortunately.  The skins
must be <literal role="extension">PNG</literal> based, and uncompressed on
disk.</para>

<para>To install a skin, (in the <trademark>Windows</trademark> ZIP format),
follow these commands:</para>

<screen><prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>cd</command> <filename class="directory">$KDEHOME/share/apps/noatun</filename></userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>mkdir</command> <option>skins</option></userinput> (if needed)
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>cd</command> <option>skins</option></userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>mkdir</command> <option>new_skin</option> ; <command>cd</command> <replaceable>new_skin</replaceable></userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>unzip</command> <replaceable>/path/to/new_skin.zip</replaceable></userinput></screen>
								      
<para>If the images aren't <acronym>PNG</acronym> based, you can easily convert
them with the following script, after changing to the skin's directory.  Replace
<userinput>bmp</userinput> with the another image format if needed.</para>
      
<screen><prompt>%</prompt> <userinput>for i in *.bmp ; do convert $i `echo $i | sed s/bmp$/png/`; done; rm *.bmp</userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>cat</command> <filename>skin.rc</filename> | <command>sed</command> <option>s/\.bmp/\.png/g</option> &gt; <filename>temp</filename> ; <command>mv</command> <filename>temp</filename> <filename>skin.rc</filename></userinput></screen>

<para>You can also make your own skins with the tutorial at <ulink
url="http://www.angelfire.com/mo/nequiem/tutorial.html">http://www.angelfire.com/mo/nequiem/tutorial.html</ulink>.
&noatun;'s implementation does not have support for the Dock/Windowshade mode,
and the seeker cannot be a bar.</para>

</sect1>

</chapter>

<chapter id="questions-answers-and-tips">

<title>Questions, Answers, and Tips</title>

<qandaset id="faq">
<title>Frequently asked questions</title>
<qandaentry>
<question>
<para>The music skips a lot when moving windows.</para>
</question>
<answer>
<para>
Have &arts; buffer more by starting the &kcontrol;, and moving
to the <guilabel>Sound</guilabel> group, and <guilabel>Soundserver</guilabel>
section, then increasing the response time.  348ms is usually sufficient for most
computers. You may also consider running the soundserver with real-time priority
if setting the response time doesn't help.  Be aware that this can
cause your system to lock-up.
</para>
</answer>
</qandaentry>
<qandaentry>
<question>
<para>The <guimenu>Plugins</guimenu> menu is empty.</para>
</question>
<answer>
<para>
Not every plugin puts an item in there.  The ID3 plugin does, for
editing the currently playing file's ID3 tag.
</para>
</answer>
</qandaentry>
 <qandaentry>
<question>
<para>I can't remove a playlist or user-interface from the plugins list.</para>
</question>
<answer>
<para>
Since &noatun; requires at least one user-interface loaded, and exactly
one playlist, you have to add a new user-interface plugin before
removing the old one.  Adding a new playlist will automatically
remove the old one.
</para>
</answer>
</qandaentry>
 <qandaentry>
<question>
<para>Where can I get more plugins?</para>
</question>
<answer>
<para>
Third-party developers can submit their own plugins to the
<ulink url="http://noatun.kde.org/plugins.phtml">&noatun; web-site</ulink>, where they
can be downloaded by you, the users.
</para>
</answer>
</qandaentry>
<qandaentry>
<question>
<para>How do I write a &noatun; plugin?</para>
</question>
<answer>
<para>
Documentation, an <acronym>API</acronym> reference, and example source code is
available at the <ulink url="http://noatun.kde.org">&noatun; web-site</ulink>.
Also, in the spirit of Open Source software, the source code to
&noatun;, and all default plugins is available.
</para>
</answer>
</qandaentry>
</qandaset>
</chapter>

<chapter id="credits-and-licenses">
<title>Credits and Licenses</title>

<para>Program copyright 2000-2001 Charles Samuels
<email>charles@kde.org</email></para>

<para>Documentation copyright 2001 Charles Samuels
<email>charles@kde.org</email></para>

<para>&noatun; has been brought to you by the following people:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>Charles Samuels <email>charles@kde.org</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Neil Stevens <email>multivac@fcmail.com</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Stefan Westerfeld <email>stefan@space.twc.de</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Martin Vogt <email>mvogt@rhrk.uni-kl.de</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Malte Starostik <email>malte.starostik@t-online.de</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Nikolas Zimmermann <email>wildfox@kde.org</email></para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>Stefan Schimanski <email>1Stein@gmx.de</email></para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<!-- TRANS:CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS -->

&underFDL;
&underBSDLicense;

</chapter>

<appendix id="installation">
<title>Installation</title>

<sect1 id="how-to-obtain-Noatun">
<title>How to obtain &noatun;</title>

<para>&noatun; is included with all &kde; releases after 2.1.</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="requirements">
<title>Requirements</title>

<para>&noatun; requires at least a Pentium 200 with &Linux;, a PowerPC with
&Linux; 2.4.1 or later, or several other platforms.  Support for more platforms
will be available in later versions.</para>

<para>For a platform to be supported easily, it must have pthread support, and
the <acronym>OSS</acronym> sound output system, however <acronym>ALSA</acronym>
is supported under &Linux;.</para> 

</sect1>

<sect1 id="compilation-and-installation">
<title>Compilation and Installation</title>

<para>Compiling &noatun; is very easy.  The following should do it:</para>

<screen>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>./configure</command></userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>make</command></userinput>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>make</command> <option>install</option></userinput></screen>

<para>That should do it! Should you run into any problems, please report them to
the author at <email>charles@kde.org</email>.</para>

<para>If you have this documentation, you've probably already compiled
&noatun;</para>

</sect1>

</appendix>

&documentation.index; 
</book>

